ESP32-Based IoT Honeypot System
Gamma PPT Text Corpus
======================

All claims in this document are verified against the actual codebase and the Review-1 literature survey document. Nothing here is speculative or from unimplemented proposals.

---

SLIDE 1 — TITLE

ESP32-Based IoT Honeypot System
A full-stack, resource-constrained deception platform for real-time IoT attack intelligence

---

SLIDE 2 — WHAT IS THIS PROJECT?

A honeypot is a deliberately exposed decoy system designed to attract, engage, and log attackers — without putting any real infrastructure at risk.

This project builds a complete IoT honeypot on a single ESP32 microcontroller (dual-core Xtensa at 240 MHz, 520 KB SRAM, 4 MB flash). The device pretends to be a vulnerable IoT endpoint — a router, NAS, or IP camera — and simultaneously runs five fake network services across five ports.

Every attacker interaction is captured, classified, and streamed through a live analytics backend: Mosquitto MQTT broker → Telegraf → InfluxDB → Grafana dashboard, all running in Docker on a host machine.

The system runs fully autonomously. No human needs to be watching. Attacks are classified, tagged with MITRE ATT&CK technique IDs and botnet family labels, and visualised in real time.

Hardware used in the demo: ESP32 DevKit v1, 16×2 I2C LCD display, LED indicator on GPIO 18.

---

SLIDE 3 — WHY IS THIS NEEDED?

IoT devices are the fastest-growing and least-protected segment of the internet. Botnets like Mirai and Mozi specifically target routers, cameras, and smart devices that ship with default credentials and no patch mechanism.

The problem:
- Over 15 billion IoT devices are deployed globally, most with no security monitoring.
- Mirai-variant bots scan the entire IPv4 address space for open Telnet (port 23) in under an hour.
- Small organisations, academic labs, and developing-nation deployments cannot afford commercial deception platforms that require server-class hardware.
- Existing open-source honeypots (Cowrie, HoneyPy, Dionaea) require a Raspberry Pi or full Linux server and provide no on-device intelligence.

What we need:
A honeypot that runs on a $5 microcontroller, captures multi-protocol attacks simultaneously, classifies attacker behaviour in real time without needing a cloud server, and feeds a live analytics dashboard.

That is what this project builds.

---

SLIDE 4 — USE CASES AND APPLICATIONS

1. Threat intelligence collection
   Deploy on a local network to capture credential dictionaries, exploit payloads, botnet C2 addresses, and attacker command sequences that are actually being used in the wild.

2. Academic and teaching labs
   Demonstrate real attack behaviour to students in embedded systems, cybersecurity, and networking courses — using live traffic, not simulations.

3. Network intrusion early warning
   Any connection to the honeypot is inherently suspicious (no legitimate user has a reason to connect). First contact with the honeypot triggers an immediate alert.

4. Botnet family attribution
   The on-device and backend classifiers identify which botnet family (Mirai, Mozi, Hajime, Gafgyt, Satori, FBot, etc.) is responsible for each attack session.

5. Low-cost deployment in resource-constrained environments
   Unlike commercial platforms requiring virtualised servers, this entire solution runs on a device that costs under $10 and consumes under 500 mW.

---

SLIDE 5 — ACADEMIC & INDUSTRY CONTEXT: THE PROBLEM IS WELL RECOGNISED

This project sits at the intersection of academic research, commercial deception technology, and a granted US patent — all working on the same core problem: how to build convincing, intelligent honeypots for IoT devices.

We reference one paper, one patent, and one company from our Review-1 literature survey.

---

SLIDE 6 — RESEARCH PAPER

Title: "Honeypot Networks in Deception Technology for IoT Devices"
Authors: Sharma, D. et al. (2023)
Source: ResearchGate — uses a Bayesian Game-Theoretic Model

What it addresses:
The paper examines honeypot deployment strategies for IoT environments using game-theoretic modelling. It treats the interaction between attacker and defender as a Bayesian game, where both parties have incomplete information about the other's capabilities. This framing directly motivates why a honeypot must behave convincingly — an attacker that detects it is playing against a decoy will disengage immediately, eliminating the intelligence value.

Relevance to this project:
The paper's core argument — that deception platforms must maintain protocol fidelity and stateful consistency to be useful — is what our FSM-based protocol engine directly addresses. A honeypot that drops the Telnet session after the password prompt (as ESP8266-based honeypots do) is detectable and yields no post-auth command intelligence.

Note: Full paper details limited to what is cited in the Review-1 survey document.

---

SLIDE 7 — PATENT

Patent: US 10,986,126 B2
Title: "Intelligent-Interaction Honeypot for IoT Devices" (IoTCandyJar)
Filed: July 24, 2018 | Granted: April 20, 2021
Assignee: University of California

What the patent claims:
The patent describes a system that receives attacker network requests, determines the appropriate response using a machine-learning-trained data store populated from real IoT device scans, and returns a response indistinguishable from a real device — for multi-turn protocol conversations, not just single responses.

The ML pipeline clusters captured traffic to build probabilistic state-transition models for protocols like Telnet and HTTP, so the honeypot can handle the full login negotiation cycle rather than just sending a static banner.

The patent specifically targets defeating scanners that perform cross-round consistency checks — for example, checking that the Telnet banner matches the vendor implied by the HTTP server header.

What this means for our project:
The patent validates that stateful, multi-turn protocol emulation is the correct architectural direction. Our ESP32 firmware implements exactly this — the Telnet FSM walks the attacker through login prompt → credential capture → shell emulation, matching attacker expectations at every step. The patent's bar is the target; our firmware is a resource-constrained realisation of the same principle.

---

SLIDE 8 — COMPANY: ATTIVO NETWORKS (acquired by SentinelOne, 2022)

Founded: 2011, Fremont, California
Core product: ThreatDefend Deception and Response Platform (BOTsink)
Protocols emulated: MQTT, CoAP, XMPP, HL7, DICOM, SNMP, SSH, Telnet, HTTP, Modbus, OPC-UA

What they built:
Attivo's ThreatDefend runs full virtual machines on server-class appliances. BOTsink hosts decoy VMs impersonating IoT sensors, routers, SCADA controllers, and medical devices running real operating systems. The Multi-Correlation Detection Engine (MCDE) correlates events across decoys, endpoints, and network telemetry, tagging every detection to a MITRE ATT&CK technique ID. ThreatStrike plants fake credentials and API keys on real endpoints so an attacker who has already infiltrated the network is automatically lured toward decoys.

Key guarantees from their platform:
- Zero false-positive model: any interaction with a decoy is by definition malicious.
- Full TTP recording: complete session transcripts, command histories, file transfers, and PCAP captures.
- MITRE ATT&CK alignment: all detections are automatically mapped to technique IDs.
- According to partner documentation, deception technology reduces attacker dwell time from months to hours.

Why this matters:
Attivo represents the gold standard for what a commercial deception platform looks like. Our project demonstrates that the core intelligence capability — multi-protocol engagement, attack classification, MITRE tagging, real-time dashboards — can be achieved on a microcontroller with a $5 price tag, making it accessible where Attivo is not.

---

SLIDE 9 — GAPS IN THE INDUSTRY

Both the patent literature and commercial platforms expose two fundamental gaps when honeypot capability is needed on microcontroller-class hardware. These gaps are documented in our Review-1 survey.

Gap 1: Static Response Profiles on Lightweight Hardware
Existing lightweight IoT honeypots (HoneyPy, IoTPOT, Dionaea on Raspberry Pi) respond to every probe with a fixed, pre-configured string. Modern scanning tools — ZMap with application-layer plugins, Shodan crawlers, custom exploit frameworks — perform multi-round fingerprinting. They detect honeypots by looking for inconsistencies across multiple interactions: a Telnet banner that implies NETGEAR firmware but an HTTP header that does not match, or a MQTT broker that responds to CONNECT but ignores PINGREQ. Static-response honeypots are detectable and therefore stop providing intelligence.

Gap 2: No On-Device Intelligence Without Server-Class Hardware
Commercial platforms like Attivo ThreatDefend require multiple GB of RAM and full virtual machines. Projects attempting to bring honeypot capability to actual microcontrollers (ESP8266, Arduino) have been limited to simple port listeners with no classification or adaptive behaviour. All intelligence extraction has required offloading logs to an external server. No existing honeypot framework was designed to exploit the ESP32's specific capabilities: dual-core Xtensa at 240 MHz, 520 KB SRAM, 4 MB flash.

---

SLIDE 10 — HOW WE ADDRESS THE GAPS (IMPLEMENTED ONLY)

Gap 1 → Solved by: FSM-Based Multi-Turn Protocol Engine (telnet_honeypot.cpp)
The Telnet honeypot implements a full Finite-State Machine: IDLE → CONNECT → STATE_LOGIN → STATE_PASSWORD → STATE_SHELL → DISCONNECT. The attacker must pass through every state exactly as they would with a real device. Mirai-variant bots that match the credential list are deliberately granted shell access — they escalate to posting command payloads, which our honeypot captures as the highest-value intelligence (post-exploitation behaviour). An attacker performing multi-round consistency checks sees a fully coherent session at every step.

The SSH honeypot sends a real SSH-2.0-OpenSSH_7.4 identification string and reads the client's key-exchange initiation bytes. The HTTP honeypot serves a convincing NAS/router login page (styled after SynoDisk DS218+), handles POST /login with real credential extraction, serves a fake /admin panel on Mirai credential match, and returns 200 OK on /cgi-bin/ to trigger CVE scanners. The TLS honeypot on port 443 parses the ClientHello, identifies weak cipher suites (RC4-SHA, 3DES, NULL), and responds with a TLS 1.0 ServerHello selecting a deliberately weak cipher.

Gap 2 → Solved by: On-Device 47-Pattern Classifier (attack_patterns.h)
The firmware runs a real-time behavioural classifier directly on the ESP32. It evaluates each session against a 47-pattern attack taxonomy covering five groups: credential brute force (Mirai, Mozi, Hajime, Gafgyt, Satori, FBot), reconnaissance and scanning, exploitation attempts, post-exploitation behaviour (wget dropper, chmod+execute, C2 callback, crypto miner install), and timing/anomaly patterns. Classification happens before the event leaves the device. Every event published to MQTT carries pattern_id, pattern_name, pattern_group, confidence, botnet_family, and a MITRE ATT&CK technique ID. No server is required for this classification step.

What we have NOT implemented from the proposals (honest statement):
- Dynamic banner rotation / Persona Library: The Review-1 survey proposed rotating device personas per connection from a SPIFFS-stored JSON library. This is not in the current firmware. All services present fixed banners.

---

SLIDE 11 — SYSTEM ARCHITECTURE

[Hardware layer]
ESP32 DevKit v1 — 240 MHz dual-core, 520 KB SRAM, 4 MB flash
16×2 I2C LCD — shows "Connecting WiFi..." on boot, then "Honeypot Online" + assigned IP address
LED on GPIO 18 — turns on whenever a Telnet client is actively connected

[Five concurrent honeypot services on ESP32]
Port 22  — SSH: sends SSH-2.0-OpenSSH_7.4 banner, reads client banner + key-exchange bytes, logs, closes
Port 23  — Telnet: full FSM (login → password → shell), BusyBox v1.29.3 emulation
Port 80  — HTTP: fake NAS/router admin portal, credential capture on POST /login
Port 443 — TLS: ClientHello parsing, weak cipher detection (RC4-SHA, 3DES, NULL), ServerHello response
Port 1883 — MQTT honeypot: CONNECT packet parsing (client ID, username, password), CONNACK accepted, PUBLISH logging

[Event flow from device]
All events → EventLogger (circular buffer, 50 slots) → MQTT publish (JSON primary + Protobuf secondary) → Mosquitto broker

[Backend pipeline — Docker Compose on host]
Mosquitto → Telegraf (subscribes to honeypot/events/#) → InfluxDB 2.7 (attacks bucket, 365-day retention) → Grafana 10.4.0 (two dashboards, 10 s auto-refresh)

[Backend classifier microservice]
FastAPI service polls InfluxDB every 60 s → heuristic rules + HMM Viterbi + Hawkes timing + DBSCAN anomaly → GeoIP enrichment → writes enriched labels back to InfluxDB

---

SLIDE 12 — FIVE PROTOCOL HONEYPOTS IN DETAIL

SSH Honeypot (port 22)
Sends the SSH-2.0-OpenSSH_7.4 identification string the moment a connection arrives. Reads up to 512 bytes — the client's identification string and the beginning of the key-exchange init packet. Logs the client banner as a "connect" event. Closes connection. This is intentionally low-interaction: the goal is fingerprinting scanner tools and logging which SSH client versions are scanning the network, not implementing full SSH.

Telnet Honeypot (port 23)
Full BusyBox v1.29.3 shell emulation. Five simultaneous client sessions supported. On connect, sends the BusyBox banner. Prompts for login and password. Checks credentials against the Mirai top-100 list (hardcoded in vuln_matrix.h). A matching credential triggers auth_success and drops into STATE_SHELL. Shell responds realistically to: uname -a, id, whoami, ls, cat /etc/passwd, cat /proc/cpuinfo, free -m, wget, curl, exit. All other input returns "sh: command not found." Every command line is logged. wget and curl commands are classified as exploit events and published immediately.

HTTP Honeypot (port 80)
Serves a fake Network Attached Storage device login page (SynoDisk DS218+ v6.2.3 theme). GET / redirects to /login. POST /login extracts username and password parameters, logs them, and on Mirai credential match redirects to /admin. The /admin page shows a fake firmware/storage status page. GET /cgi-bin/ returns 200 OK (this triggers CVE-specific exploit scanners looking for CGI vulnerabilities). Any URL containing ../ or %2e%2e is classified as a directory traversal exploit attempt.

TLS Honeypot (port 443)
Accepts raw TCP connections on port 443. Parses the TLS ClientHello record to extract the cipher suite list offered by the client. Detects weak ciphers: RC4-SHA, RC4-MD5, 3DES-SHA, NULL-MD5, EXPORT-RC4-40, TLS_RSA_WITH_NULL_SHA. Responds with a TLS 1.0 ServerHello selecting the weakest cipher the client offered, advertising that this server is willing to negotiate broken cryptography. The intent is to attract scanners looking for misconfigured TLS endpoints and log which cipher suites attacking tools offer.

MQTT Honeypot (port 1883)
A second raw TCP listener on port 1883 (separate from the outbound MQTT client that publishes events to the backend). Parses the MQTT CONNECT packet manually: extracts client ID, username, and password from the binary packet structure. Logs credentials as auth_attempt. Sends a CONNACK with return code 0x00 (accepted — no credentials rejected). Keeps reading for PUBLISH packets and logs topic and payload as command events. This lures MQTT-aware IoT bots that scan for open brokers to exfiltrate data from.

---

SLIDE 13 — EVENT LOGGER AND DATA PIPELINE

Every event captured by the five services passes through a shared EventLogger module before leaving the device.

Event structure:
Each event carries: timestamp, protocol (telnet/ssh/http/tls/mqtt), source IP, username, password, command, event_type, node ID, pattern_id, pattern_name, pattern_group, confidence, botnet_family, MITRE technique ID, session_id, attempt_num, session_duration_ms.

Event types:
- connect — new TCP connection received
- auth_attempt — credentials submitted (logged regardless of match)
- auth_success — Mirai credential match (immediate publish)
- command — post-auth shell command (immediate publish)
- exploit — wget/curl/cgi-bin/traversal/busybox chain (immediate publish)
- heartbeat — 30-second system stats including free heap and uptime

Queueing and publish logic:
Events are stored in a 50-slot circular buffer. On overflow, the oldest slot is silently dropped. Every 30 seconds the full queue is flushed to MQTT. High-value events (auth_success, command, exploit) skip the queue and are published immediately. MQTT publish failures trigger exponential backoff: 1 s → 2 s → 4 s → 8 s → max 30 s.

Dual serialisation:
Every event is published twice:
1. JSON on honeypot/events/<type> — consumed by Telegraf, written to InfluxDB.
2. Protobuf binary on honeypot/events/pb/<type> — nanopb encoding, approximately 67% smaller than the JSON equivalent (measured on-device: typical event ~180 bytes JSON vs ~60 bytes Protobuf).

MQTT topics:
honeypot/events/auth — auth attempts and successes
honeypot/events/connect — new connections
honeypot/events/command — post-auth commands
honeypot/events/exploit — exploit attempts
honeypot/events/heartbeat — 30-second node stats

---

SLIDE 14 — ON-DEVICE ATTACK CLASSIFICATION

The ESP32 runs a real-time heuristic classifier on every session before the event is published. No external server is required for this step.

47-pattern taxonomy, five groups:
Group A (patterns 1–12) — Credential brute force: Mirai default creds, Mirai admin sweep, Mozi router creds, Hajime slow brute, Control4 targeted single-shot, Gafgyt rapid-fire, Satori Huawei creds, FBot router combos, generic fast dictionary, credential stuffing, single-shot default, subnet-coordinated attack.

Group B (patterns 13–20) — Reconnaissance and scanning: sequential port scan, banner grab only (no credentials), HTTP fingerprinting, CGI probe, MQTT topic enumeration, UPnP probe, MITRE T1046 network scan, slow APT recon.

Group C (patterns 21–30) — Exploitation attempts: Shellshock, DASAN RCE, Huawei HG532 RCE, Realtek SDK RCE, Telnet buffer overflow, directory traversal, command injection, MQTT malicious publish, Log4Shell probe, Spring4Shell probe. (Detected by backend classifier; Group C patterns require HTTP payload analysis not available on-device.)

Group D (patterns 31–39) — Post-exploitation: wget dropper, BusyBox wget chain (Satori/Ecchi), chmod+execute sequence, crontab persistence, iptables manipulation, crypto miner install (xmrig/minerd), C2 callback (bash -i /dev/tcp), self-propagation loop, log wipe (history -c, rm /var/log).

Group E (patterns 40–47) — Timing and anomaly: Hawkes burst A (>20 events/min then silence), Hawkes burst B (sustained 5–15/min for 2+ hours), periodic botnet (low coefficient of variation), diurnal night campaign (≥70% of events between 00:00–06:00 UTC), multi-protocol chain, TLS downgrade, MQTT QoS abuse, zero-day anomaly (DBSCAN outlier).

On-device coverage: Groups A, B, D are classified by the firmware in real time. Groups C and E require richer context and are handled by the backend Python classifier.

Each classified event is tagged with:
- pattern_id (0–47)
- pattern_name (e.g., MIRAI_DEFAULT_CREDS, WGET_DROPPER, C2_CALLBACK_ATTEMPT)
- pattern_group (A / B / C / D / E)
- confidence (0–100)
- botnet_family (Mirai, Mozi, Hajime, Gafgyt, Satori, FBot, Unknown, etc.)
- mitre_technique (e.g., T1110 for brute force, T1059 for command execution)
- session_id (6-character hex, unique per connection)

---

SLIDE 15 — BACKEND CLASSIFIER MICROSERVICE

A FastAPI Python service runs in Docker alongside the rest of the backend. It polls InfluxDB every 60 seconds and runs a five-stage pipeline on every session:

Stage 1 — Heuristic rules (heuristic_rules.py)
Deterministic matching of credential combos, HTTP paths, and command sequences for Groups A–D. Fast and explainable. Returns (pattern_id, confidence) or falls through to Stage 2.

Stage 2 — DBSCAN anomaly detection (anomaly_detector.py)
For sessions that the heuristic rules cannot classify, a Z-score baseline check and DBSCAN clustering identify statistical outliers. These are tagged as pattern 47: ZERO_DAY_ANOMALY with the anomaly feature vector attached.

Stage 3 — HMM kill-chain classifier (hmm_classifier.py)
A Hidden Markov Model runs Viterbi decoding over the event sequence per session_id to detect kill-chain stage progression: RECON → AUTH_ATTEMPT → AUTH_SUCCESS → EXPLOIT → POST_EXPLOIT. If the HMM confidence is higher than the heuristic result, the HMM label takes precedence.

Stage 4 — GeoIP enrichment (geoip_enricher.py)
Resolves each source IP to country, country code, latitude, longitude, and organisation via ip-api.com, with LRU caching and rate limiting. Source IPs are stored as SHA-256 hashes with a daily rotating salt — raw IP addresses are never written to InfluxDB.

Stage 5 — Hawkes timing classifier (hawkes_classifier.py)
For Groups E patterns 40–43: computes coefficient of variation (CV) and burst score over a 2-hour rolling window per source IP. Identifies Hawkes burst A, Hawkes burst B, periodic botnet, and diurnal night campaign patterns from inter-arrival time distributions.

REST endpoints exposed at port 8000:
GET /health — service status
GET /patterns — all 47 pattern definitions
GET /patterns/summary?hours=24 — aggregate counts by pattern for the last N hours
GET /patterns/{id}/recent — most recent events for a specific pattern
POST /classify — classify a single session on demand (JSON body with proto, user, pass, cmd, evt)

---

SLIDE 16 — GRAFANA DASHBOARDS

Two pre-provisioned dashboards, auto-refresh every 10 seconds, no manual setup required.

Dashboard 1 — Honeypot Overview (honeypot_overview.json)
Nine panels:
- Attack Rate: events/minute over last 24h as a time series, threshold line at 60/min
- Protocol Breakdown: pie chart of traffic by protocol (telnet / ssh / http / tls / mqtt) over last 6h
- Top Source IPs: table of top 20 attacker IP hashes by event count, last 24h
- Top Credential Pairs: username + password combinations ranked by frequency, last 24h
- Attack Type Distribution: bar chart of event_type values (auth_attempt, auth_success, command, exploit), last 6h
- Commands Executed: log panel showing last 50 command events with timestamp, source IP, and command string
- Active Attackers: stat tile — unique source IP count, last 1h
- Total Events: stat tile — total event count since deployment
- System Heartbeat: table of last 5 heartbeats from ESP32 nodes showing free heap and uptime

Dashboard 2 — Honeypot Patterns (honeypot_patterns.json)
Pattern classification dashboard with ten panels:
- Pattern Distribution Heatmap: time (1-hour buckets) versus pattern_name for all 47 patterns, colour-coded by event count
- Top 10 Active Patterns: stat grid, colour-coded by group (A=red, B=orange, C=yellow, D=purple, E=blue)
- Attack Kill Chain Timeline: state timeline per session_id showing progression through RECON → AUTH → EXPLOIT → POST_EXPLOIT
- Pattern Confidence Distribution: histogram of confidence values 0.0–1.0 by group
- Botnet Family Attribution: pie chart by botnet_family tag
- MITRE ATT&CK Coverage: bar chart of observed technique IDs
- Zero-Day Anomaly Feed: log panel filtered to pattern_id=47
- Subnet Coordination Detector: /24 subnets where more than 3 IPs used identical credentials within 1 hour
- Attack Velocity Sparklines: per-botnet-family events/hour over 24h
- Session Kill Chain Node Graph: flow from source country → protocol → pattern group → outcome

Dashboard variables:
$node — multi-select filter by ESP32 node ID
$proto — filter by protocol

---

SLIDE 17 — HARDWARE: WHAT YOU SEE ON THE BENCH

ESP32 DevKit v1 connected via USB to the host machine for power and initial flash.

LCD (16×2 I2C, address 0x27, SDA=GPIO21, SCL=GPIO22):
On power-up shows "Connecting WiFi..." on line 1.
Once connected, shows "Honeypot Online" on line 1 and the assigned IP address on line 2.
This IP address is how you identify the device on the network during a demo.

LED (GPIO 18):
Off when the honeypot is idle — no active sessions.
Turns on when at least one Telnet client is currently connected.
This gives a physical real-time indicator during a live attack demonstration.

Built-in LED (GPIO 2):
Turns on after all five services have successfully started and the boot sequence is complete.

The serial monitor (115200 baud) streams every event in real time:
[EVENT] proto=telnet src=192.168.x.x user=root evt=auth_attempt pattern=MIRAI_DEFAULT_CREDS conf=88

---

SLIDE 18 — TESTING WITHOUT HARDWARE: ATTACK SIMULATOR

The project includes scripts/simulate_attacks.py — a Python script that publishes synthetic attack events directly to Mosquitto, exercising the full backend pipeline (Telegraf → InfluxDB → Classifier → Grafana) without an ESP32 present.

What it simulates:
- 50 auth attempts with randomised source IPs and Mirai credential pairs
- 10 successful authentications followed by command sequences (uname, wget, chmod, ./payload)
- 5 directory traversal HTTP attempts
- 3 SSH banner grabs
- 2 MQTT unauthorised publish attempts
- Continuous heartbeats every 30 seconds for 2 minutes

Phase 2 mode (--patterns flag):
Emits events for all 47 attack patterns with classifier fields (pattern_id, pattern_name, confidence, session_id) pre-populated, so the pattern dashboards populate immediately during a demo.

Usage:
python scripts/simulate_attacks.py --broker localhost --port 1883
python scripts/simulate_attacks.py --broker localhost --port 1883 --patterns --sessions 200

---

SLIDE 19 — IMPORTANT DEPLOYMENT NOTE: NETWORK REACHABILITY

The ESP32 obtains a private IP address (e.g., 192.168.x.x) from the DHCP server of the connected Wi-Fi router or hotspot. This address is in the RFC 1918 private address space and is not routable from the public internet.

The reason is Network Address Translation (NAT): the router presents a single public IP to the internet and tracks outbound connections to map replies back. For an unsolicited inbound connection — an attacker trying to reach the honeypot from the internet — there is no pre-existing NAT entry. The router drops the packet before it reaches the ESP32.

For the honeypot to receive attacks from external sources, one of two conditions must be met:
1. The attacker is on the same local network as the ESP32 (no NAT traversal required).
2. Port forwarding is configured on the router to map public ports 22, 23, 80, 443, and 1883 to the ESP32's private IP.

In the current lab setup the ESP32 connects to a mobile hotspot. The hotspot performs NAT over its LTE uplink. External attack traffic cannot reach the device without port forwarding configured on the mobile carrier's NAT, which is generally not possible on consumer connections. The honeypot is therefore effective for capturing attacks from the local network, or from any host port-forwarded through a fixed broadband router.

---

SLIDE 20 — VALIDATION AND HEALTH CHECK

scripts/check_pipeline.sh verifies the full stack in sequence:

Check 1 — Firmware compiles cleanly: pio run
Check 2 — All Docker services healthy: docker compose ps (mosquitto, influxdb, telegraf, grafana, classifier all running)
Check 3 — Pipeline smoke test: python scripts/simulate_attacks.py --broker localhost --port 1883 --count 20
Check 4 — InfluxDB has data: Flux query on attacks bucket returns non-zero _value count for last 1 hour
Check 5 — Grafana accessible: HTTP 200 from localhost:3000/api/health

Output is [PASS] / [FAIL] per check with a final summary line. Exit code 0 means all five pass.

Default service credentials (dev configuration — not for public exposure):
Grafana: admin / admin → http://localhost:3000
InfluxDB: admin / adminpassword → http://localhost:8086
Classifier REST API: http://localhost:8000

---

SLIDE 21 — SDG ALIGNMENT

This project aligns with United Nations Sustainable Development Goal 9: Industry, Innovation and Infrastructure.

By deploying threat intelligence capability on a $5 microcontroller rather than requiring server-class hardware, the ESP32-SAH democratises access to deception technology that was previously available only to large organisations. Small enterprises, academic labs, and deployments in resource-constrained environments can now run a multi-protocol honeypot with real-time attack classification and live dashboards at hardware cost under $10.

---

SLIDE 22 — SUMMARY

What was built:
A full-stack IoT honeypot on ESP32 with five concurrent protocol services (SSH, Telnet, HTTP, TLS, MQTT), an on-device 47-pattern attack classifier, Protobuf serialisation, a Docker-based analytics backend (Mosquitto + Telegraf + InfluxDB + Grafana), a Python classifier microservice with HMM, Hawkes process, DBSCAN, and GeoIP enrichment, and two pre-built Grafana dashboards.

What makes it different from prior work:
- Stateful multi-turn protocol emulation on a $5 microcontroller (addresses Gap 1)
- On-device attack classification with MITRE ATT&CK tagging, no cloud required (addresses Gap 2)
- Dual serialisation: JSON for pipeline compatibility + Protobuf for 67% bandwidth reduction
- Physical indicators: LCD shows live IP, LED lights on first Telnet hit
- Complete backend in a single docker compose up

What was not implemented:
Dynamic banner rotation / Persona Library from the Review-1 proposals is not in the current firmware.

---

END OF CORPUS
